EASTERN WHITE PINE
DESCRIPTION: Leaves or needles 3 to 5 inches long, bluish green on the upper surface, whitish below and occurring in bundles of 5 to a sheath. Fruit or cone 4 to 8 inches long, cylindrical, with flat, usually gummy scales. The small, winged seed mature in September of the second year. Bark on young stems and branches, thin, smooth and greenish in color, becoming on old trunk 1 to 2 inches thick, separating into broad, flat ridges, covered with grayish brown scales. A tree, characterized by its slightly ascending branches, occurring in regular whorls; at maturity, often 80 or more feet in height with a straight trunk 2 to 3 feet in diameter.
KEY CHARACTERISTICS: Leaves or needles bluish-green on the upper surface, whitish below and occurring in bundles of 5 to a sheath; cones 4 to 8 inches long, cylindrical, with usually gummy flat scales; branches occurring in regular whorls.
WOOD: Light, soft, not strong, usually straight grained, light brown often tinged with red.
USES: General construction, interior finish, patterns, caskets, clocks, cabinet making, matches, and many other products; often used as an ornamental shade tree.
DISTRIBUTION: Occurring throughout the mountains in the northern part of the state, usually in the cool, moist coves and valleys.
LONGLEAF PINE
DESCRIPTION: Leaves or needles 10 to 18 inches long, in crowded clusters of 3 to the sheath; dark green in color. Fruit or cone maturing at the end of the second season, 6 to few of the basal scales attached to the twig. Bark light orange brown, separating into large, papery scales. A long-lived tree often 100 feet or more in height with a straight, slightly tapering trunk about 2 to 3 feet in diameter. (An outstanding feature in the spring is the large, silvery white terminal bud).
KEY CHARACTERISTICS: Leaves or needles 10 to 18 inches long, in crowded clusters of 3 to the sheath; cone 6 to 10 inches long, dull brown; buds silvery white.
WOOD: Heavy, hard, strong, coarse-grained, light reddish yellow. Durable heartwood.
USES: Strongest of the southern yellow pines. Used in construction, for railroad ties, poles and piling, railroad cars, boats, pulp, etc. This tree is one of the two species which produces gum naval stores.
DISTRIBUTION: Confined principally to the coastal plain but ranging inland on the western border of the state to the vicinity of Rome; forming open stands on dry, sandy soils. The tree can grow on sites too dry and sterile for the other southern yellow pines.
